
Financial challenges faced by person with dementia. The idea: A person with dementia and the family face many financial challenges. We need to emphasize economies of the cost of care. My name is Mike Donohue. I am just short of 75 years old, having been diagnosed five years ago. I have atypical AD. It is A-Typical because it is somewhat different than the norm. My memory is more intact than many, my cognition remains good as does my ability to read and write. Other limitations of the Alzheimer’s kind I do have. These keep me from driving, biking, handling money and doing more than one thing at a time. Alz.Org and other professional, social and charitable organizations, need to concentrate on formulating and developing programs of care that offer greater economy than those as now exist.  When a family is faced with its diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease it faces a variety of issues that need immediate resolution. One of these is the handling of their estate (their saved living and retirement funds) which may be irretrievably altered by reason of the current prognosis for care of the Alzheimer’s afflicted.   Financial Issues of First Facing This Disease.  Of the many things that need to be dealt with will be the following:     What will happen if the care needed has cost which the family is not able to pay?      Is there long term health coverage to pay this?     Does Normal Health Care coverage or Medicare provide any help?     Is the Alzheimer Afflicted able to continue working, earning the same salary? Is the spouse working earning income, is that enough to currently support the family?     If income of one subsides or of all of them reduce will the family be able to make it?     Where does the family go to fill the gap?  The Answers To These Questions Are Not Pretty!     The family’s private funds are normally the first source for payment of any cost of care not immediately covered by the insurance of the family.     Long Term Health Care coverage, if sufficient, if it specifically makes provisions, and is designed to run a sufficiently long time, will pay cost of care in the home and out of home care provided by agencies qualifying for reimbursement. This applies to most institutional Nursing Home and Assisted Living Facilities. It may apply to some day care and group home settings.     Health Care coverage and Medicare do not pay anything but immediate hospital and medically-related expenses provided as part of treatment. This most often does not include Nursing Home, Assisted Living facilities or equivalent styles of In House or Away from Home kinds of help.      In the event of diminution in earnings in the household because of the disease the private funds of the families are the first if not only source to make up the difference. Charitable or public assistance is predicated on the inability to pay and in many cases is difficult to get unless there is no other way.     If the family cannot make it, Public Assistance is available as well as assistance from many giving groups.     The problem is for those in-between.  Available Options. Long term health care seems worth every penny paid for it, if you have it. If you do not, with an Alzheimer’s diagnosis it is unlikely you can get it. But, remember, you get what you pay for, no more, no less. If you were smart enough and have it be sure it pays enough. Be sure it runs long enough. Be sure it covers Home, Assisted Living and Nursing Home Care.      Living Care: Some reimbursement of institutional Home care is pretty basic to all of the long term policies. Be sure in addition they cover cost of home care and cost of out of the home care not the normal institutional Nursing or Assisted Living care. Look at the type and kind of services it pays for. Does it pay for the normal group home, called foster home in some states? What are the qualifications, if any, for the home should payment for it be sought? The same applies to Home Care. Is the person who comes in to provide care qualified, certified, or, can just anyone provide the service required by simpler needs such as attendance, cooking, cleaning etc.?      Financial Planning:     Some financial planning with an expert is recommended. This is most important when it comes to evaluating the availability of Public Assistance. A need for care does not automatically produce Public Assistance. The law is very specific in determining where and how you qualify for it before you can get it.      In most cases the funds of the husband and wife seeking assistance (their entire estate) cannot exceed a little more than $100,000 between them. This may seem to be enough. It is not when you stop to consider this:  When the need for Assistance kicks in the current needs of the family don’t disappear, they continue. As an example: The husband, no longer earning income, needs daily attendant care. If the wife is home, able to give it that is not a new cost. In this situation the couple's living conditions do not change, they continue as they were.   The cost incident to the disease only goes up and too often is your obligation alone. What this means is: your current cost of living does not go down, if anything it goes up. Current cost of living mean the expenses other than the care expenses, such as home mortgage, monthly budget, the cost of the spouse not needing Care. These costs continue during the lifetime of both the husband and the wife. Circumstances change what those costs might be. They can go up, they can go down. We of course know their usual direction.  They will go down if the husband needs to go into assisted living or nursing home or some other out of home care facility. Without regard to who pays the cost of this the expenses do go down for the wife to the extent she no longer has to pay the eating and living expenses of the husband. She need no longer pay those costs incidental to his living at home. These are the only costs that stop.  When the husband dies the wife’s financial needs do not change appreciably with respect to herself. They continue. They continue her life time.  Now we come to totaling all of this to see how long that $100,000 lasts. Pull out your budget. What do you pay a month, a year? What of it will change if at all when one of you enters institutional care? Of the fixed amounts multiply them by the number of years of life expectancy the survivor is likely to live. Will it last?    Who Pays The Cost?  As these extra expenses escalate, who pays for them? You do. When can you ask for help? Anytime, anywhere, anyone can be asked. When are you entitled to help? Only when you have reached what the law calls the “Poverty Threshold.”  This threshold is when you own no more than around $103,000 total value of everything the husband and wife have. It was this amount when I checked with the experts in 2007. I believe it remains the same four years later.  Everything you have is just that! This includes bank accounts, retirement accounts face value of insurance policies, pension plans of which you are the owner not employer provided.   There are exclusions, not many, nonetheless there are. Your homestead up to $500,000 in some cases others up to 1,000,000 in value are excluded so long as the other spouse remains living in it. Certain annuities if they fit within a rigid definition of “purchase of income flow only annuities” with no right or restricted right of beneficiary appointment, these are excluded from the calculation of your estate.  If you have given it away more than five years before application for assistance is made it might qualify. By giving it away they mean just that. You must relinquish all incidents of ownership and control. This is available for irrevocable trusts only. It does not include revocable trusts. The law examines an irrevocable trust to see whether or the owner(s) have given up all control and no longer own the assets in an irrevocable trust. The essence in a revocable trust is that it can be revoked by the owner(s) and the assets returned to them.   Change.  What is needed is change.      Change in the style and cost of care.      Change finding more economical care.     Change of the existing infrastructure responding to the present needs produced by Alzheimer’s, not continuing to do something they do because that is the way they always did it.     Change of Public Assistance in the current compensation formulas.  These changes can run anywhere from qualification to supplemental provisions taking the form of more tax deduction and credit allowances, credits or incentives for public, private and non-profit ventures all directed to reducing the cost and increasing the availability of help for families faced with the overwhelming task of accommodating the alteration in their lives caused by Alzheimer’s.  It Is in the Public’s Interest.  It is in the public’s interests this be done. Alzheimer’s disease presents our short term future with a financial crisis that will devastate our already exhausted private and public capacity to pay its cost.  Proposals for Change.  What are sorely needed are lower-level care facilities and assistance programs. In whatever form, we need to consider and seek out greater economy of care in a variety of methods. We need to find alternatives to the high cost of institutional nursing home and assisted living of the facilities now provided.   Kinds of Care.  These can be but not limited to boarding and care homes, co-ops, foster homes, mutual help programs of people buying or renting a group home or grouping in same location apartments to hire and manage their own needs. Programs to support this are needed to help organize, facilitate and maintain these kinds of alternative care approaches. These could be supplied by private enterprise, charitable institutions or some lower level function than the Federal Government. This is being done in some areas; so much more is needed.   Tax Treatment.  Tax breaks and other public incentives are needed.  By history there has been a concentration of effort to remove any opportunity of anyone avoiding their personal obligation to pay for institutional care by forcing the government to do so. The history arose when the folks gave the farm to the kids, moved into the Nursing Home and applied for Old Age Assistance. They transferred the farm before they went in to avoid the county putting an Old Age Assistance Lien on it.  This may be as it ought to be. Nonetheless if private estates must first be drained of the funds needed by those depending on the person needing care, those dependents will continue to have the same economic need during and after the care is given the one in need of it.   The epidemic proportions of the issues associated with Alzheimer’s disease need attention. Tax deduction is needed for in home care, day care, respite care, any care in other forms. Deduction allowance is needed for the cost of care facilities. There needs to be a scheme to reward economy of costs in providing services. Other tax benefits are needed for programs to supplant the need of public funding for care. These need to be explored and the best of them provided.   Current Tax Treatment.  Although some deduction of cost of care facilities exists it is not clear, and too often is increased by the qualification processes that are needed so the deduction can be taken. This raises the cost of the service prohibitively.  Once qualified it is a question whether or not the person needing such care can deduct it if someone else made the payment for the service? Is the patient needing the care qualified to deduct it or is it the deduction of the caregiver requiring the additional help or making the payment? Can anyone deduct if they pay it? Who determines the qualification of the person in need before any deduction can be taken?  The tax breaks depend on the taxpayer entitled to the break having the income from which to take the break or income tax liability from which to take a credit. Many on fixed income fall between the cracks. They have too little income from too much estate to qualify for public assistance. This is but one of those open cracks. Some scheme of credits, rebates or something more direct needs to be considered for those who do not benefit from the deduction credit allowed against taxable income or tax liability.  Change Will Save The System.  We need to find a more economical way of providing care and respite for the Afflicted and the Affected before the Cost of Care bankrupts the system and puts everyone out in the street. The problems today with cost of living, health care and insurance costs, medical and hospital costs, the inability of our politicians to get it together in any meaningful way demonstrate what will come. Gridlock!  The prospect of what we all will face is magnified by the inability of our culture, institutions and governmental processes to provide care. The current insurmountable costs we have caring for ourselves without Dementia, namely living day to day, is already insurmountable. Keeping a job, paying the bills as middle class is squeezed into poverty class complicates it. This with all of the other difficulties creates an impossible situation. How then are we to meet this coming crises bearing down on us at breakneck speed?   If we are unable to find a cure for this disease quickly there will be no funds left with which to seek Economy of Care. The coming increase of people needing care because of this disease is frightening. 
			