
Johann Baptist Cramer. Johann Baptist Cramer was born in Mannheim on 24 Feb 1771 and died in London on 16 April 1858. He was a composer, pianist and publisher, the eldest son of Wilhelm Cramer. He was the most outstanding member of the family. As one of the most renowned piano performers of his day, he contributed directly to the formulation of an idiomatic piano style through his playing and his compositions. When he was about three years old he was taken to London by his mother to join his father, who had decided to establish himself in England. Wilhelm taught his son the violin from a very early age, but the child showed distinct precocity at the piano and at the age of seven was placed under the direction of J.D. Benser. He continued his studies with J.S. Schroeter from 1780 to 1783, when he was entrusted to Muzio Clementi. Although he studied with Clementi for only one year, the lessons were decisive in forming his artistic character. His formal training was completed with lessons in theory (from 1785) under C.F. Abel, through whom Cramer first came to know the writings of Kirnberger and Marpurg. His early training acquainted him with the works of the greatest keyboard composers of the century, and by the mid-1780s he had studied works of Clementi, Schröter, J.C. Bach, C.P.E. Bach, Domenico Scarlatti, Müthel, Paradies, Haydn and Mozart. He may have been introduced to Das wohltemperirte Clavier as early as 1787, and he developed a lifelong fascination for Bach. By the time Clementi left England for the Continent and Cramer's formal piano lessons were abruptly ended, he had already attracted attention as a performer in London. He made his formal début on 6 April 1781, appearing in his father's annual benefit concert. He performed occasionally during the next few years, at one concert (in 1784) playing a duet for two pianos with Clementi.  In 1788 Cramer undertook his first foreign tour and visited the major cities of France and Germany, including Paris and Berlin. While in France he was given a number of J.S. Bach's manuscripts. His earliest compositions were also published during his stay in France. On his return to England in 1791 he immediately began an active performing career, and during the next nine seasons established himself as England's most remarkable young pianist, capable of providing stiff competition for the older virtuosos. He participated as a soloist in both major series, the Professional Concert and the Salomon Concerts, as well as appearing in numerous benefit concerts. He made the acquaintance of all the eminent artists who appeared in London during that decade, including Haydn, and he began to gain recognition as a composer and teacher.  Cramer left London in 1799 for a second journey that included the Netherlands, Germany and Austria. He met Beethoven in Vienna, initiating a warm and mutually rewarding relationship, and he renewed his friendly association with Haydn. On his return to England in 1800 he married almost immediately. The activities of his first 30 years had brought him into contact with nearly all the most prominent musicians of Europe, including Hummel, Dussek, Weber, Kalkbrenner, Cherubini and Wölfl, in addition to those already mentioned. In later years he came to know Ries, Czerny, Moscheles, Mendelssohn, Liszt and Berlioz. He championed with characteristic vigour the works of composers whom he admired; his performances of Bach and Mozart, in particular, created great excitement, and he helped to introduce Beethoven's sonatas to English audiences. His impact as a popularizer of music by other composers seems to have been felt as much by his playing at private gatherings as by his concert appearances, for he preferred private music-making, even when travelling abroad.  After 1800 Cramer's public career was centred almost entirely on England. He taught privately at least into the 1820s, commanding the top fee of one guinea per lesson. But he travelled again from 1816 to 1818, visiting Amsterdam and Mannheim. While abroad he continued to renew and expand his associations, but his public performances were apparently rare. His mature years in London were marked by many signs of high regard. To admiring English audiences he was their "Glorious John", and his appearances continued to stir excitement until his formal retirement. He was one of the founders of the Philharmonic Society in 1813, and he was appointed to the board of the RAM on its foundation in 1822.  Following the very successful example of Clementi, Cramer entered the music publishing business. His earliest ventures included a partnership known as Cramer & Keys in 1805, and another partnership with Samuel Chappell (later of Chappell) from 1810 to 1819. A more lasting firm was established in 1824 (when Cramer joined Robert Addison and T.F. Beale), at a later date known as j.b. Cramer & co. ltd, which flourished from its first days and still exists.  Cramer married for the second time in 1829, and he retired officially from public life after a gala farewell concert in 1835. His next decade included visits to Munich and Vienna and a long residence in Paris, but he returned again to England in 1845 and remained there for the rest of his life. He died at his house in Kensington and was buried in the Brompton Cemetery.  The large volume of Cramer's compositions is only part of his musical achievement. His playing left a permanent impression on several generations of early 19th-century pianists. He received almost universal admiration for his playing; even Beethoven considered him the finest pianist of the day, according to Ries. His expressive legato touch, which later became a stylistic norm among pianists, was especially admired: in Moscheles's words, his legato "almost transforms a Mozart Andante into a vocal piece". His refinement in improvisation and the remarkable independence of his fingers were equally renowned; they are also evidence of his Classical ideals and distinguish him from more dramatically inclined later generations. By the end of his long career his playing may have become somewhat outmoded. Certainly Wilhelm von Lenz found his playing in the 1840s dry and harsh, though at the same time August Gathy contradicted Lenz's judgment. Cramer himself noted the changing fashions when he described earlier playing as "fort bien" ("very good") and the newer style as "bien fort" ("very strong").  Many aspects of Cramer's compositional style are strikingly conservative. He apparently liked to view himself as a latter-day Mozartian, preserving Mozart's grace, elegance and clarity. His music is generally less dramatic than Clementi's, less rich than Dussek's, less sentimental than Field's. The originality of his genius appears principally in his combination of a conservative bias with the most advanced, idiomatically pianistic passage-work. Although there is an inconsistency in the quality of his works that was observed even by critics of his day, his music is nearly always skilful, pleasant and sophisticated, and his ingenuity in passage-work expanded the vocabulary of colourful and evocative sonorities available to the piano.  Cramer's affinity for certain Classical ideas did not prevent him from assimilating the newer musical forms that became popular in the early 19th century, and his own work accurately reflects the changing tastes of the period.  Nearly all his 117 sonatas, for example, were written before 1820, and his production of didactic works, capriccios, fantasias and small pieces based on popular tunes increased markedly after 1810. He supplied so much music for the dilettante that by the end of the century his name was used in France as a pseudonym for musical trifles.  Of all Cramer's works, the one that has had the greatest enduring value is his celebrated set of 84 studies for the piano, published in two sets of 42 each in 1804 and 1810 as "Studio per il pianoforte". This collection has long been considered a cornerstone of pianistic technique and is the only work of Cramer's that is generally known today. Clementi claimed for himself the idea of such a comprehensive technical volume, accusing Cramer of having stolen the idea and title for the "Studio". Cramer's work inspired many similar efforts, some being mere imitations. Soon after its appearance, Steibelt and Wölfl produced sets of studies, and Clementi eventually published his Gradus ad Parnassum.  Nevertheless, Cramer's "Studio" was the most widely used and admired collection in the early 19th century. Beethoven annotated 21 of the studies for his nephew's use (published in an edition by J.S. Shedlock in 1893) and considered them "the best preparation for his own works". Schumann described the "Studio" as the finest training "for head and hand". The studies are structurally simple; each is based on a characteristic pattern or mechanical problem, and although the shadows of Bach and Domenico Scarlatti are often apparent, the harmonic colouring and figurational variety in the "Studio" are eminently modern and entirely suited to the piano. The success of the studies led Cramer to produce many more methods, including the "Anweisung das Pianoforte zu spielen", which includes rules for fingering and the use of the pedals. Some of the later studies were given individual descriptive titles, in keeping with the fashion, but none of them matched the "Studio" in usefulness and artistic merit.  The scope and seriousness of Cramer's compositions often varies widely within a single category; even among the sonatas and concertos the range is considerable.  The best of the shorter pieces anticipate the general features of the character piece in form and expressiveness, while many works were plainly directed to the unsophisticated amateur. The sonatas, in spite of their diminishing numbers in Cramer's later years, contain some of his most impressive achievements. There is some evidence that Beethoven occasionally borrowed from Cramer's sonatas, and Schumann considered Cramer and Moscheles the only outstanding sonata composers of their generation.  The accompanied sonatas, which comprise less than half the total number, are generally lighter and more popular in character than the solo sonatas. After 1800 Cramer showed a clear preference for solo works, although some of the later solo sonatas still have some popular features, such as the inclusion of "favourite airs". The sonatas written after 1810 are more consistently serious and contain more prominent Romantic characteristics. Several have descriptive titles ("Il mezzo", "Le retour à Londres") and a highly flexible, dramatic approach to the use of compass and texture. In harmonic daring they show the impact of Beethoven, and they abound in sweeping, colouristic accompanimental patterns.  Cramer's late sonatas were occasionally reprinted in the 19th century, but they have passed into obscurity in more recent times.  Copyright (C) Oxford University Press 2007-2013.
			