
Musicology, §II: Disciplines of musicology. II. Disciplines of musicology 2. Theoretical and analytical method. (iii) Analytic traditions.  It is useful to distinguish music analysis as a subdiscipline in music theory from the regulative traditions just described, even though the two are interdependent. While a fuller history and taxonomy of music analysis is recounted elsewhere (see Analysis), it will be appropriate here to say something about the methods and claims of music analysis and its relation to be broader epistemology of music theory.  In music analysis one is primarily concerned with the structure and individuating features of a particular piece of music. Typically, this involves two tasks: (1) to inventory the components of a particular composition deemed significant by the analyst; and (2) to explain the particular disposition and relationship of those components. Of course, any kind of analysis presupposes a theoretical stance: that is to say, it is not possible to undertake an analysis without theoretical presumptions, however informally conceived, that help determine the questions to pose and the kinds of language and method by which these questions may be answered. But unlike the systematic traditions of regulative theory described earlier, the goal of music analysis is normally an understanding and aesthetic appreciation of the musical piece itself as an ontologically unique artwork, not the exemplification of some broader norm of structure or syntax.  A good example of such particularist analysis is seen in E.T.A. Hoffmann's famous review of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, published in 1810. Unlike many earlier examples of music "analysis" that offered generalized taxonomies of particular pieces (often using rhetorical terminology) in order to illustrate classical norms of structure and process, Hoffman undertook his analysis to reveal what was distinguishing and unique in Beethoven's composition. For Hoffmann, much of this uniqueness stemmed from the music's particular motivic material and its ingenious development. Not surprisingly, such close analytic readings were indebted to Romantic ideologies of historicism and the cult of artistic genius; far from being models for compositional emulation, the musical objects of analysis tended to be drawn from a canon of irreproduceable "masterworks". Analysis revealed at once the singular features that made up a particular composition (these typically being unusual thematic and harmonic material or special deviations from formal conventions) as well as the means by which these features cohered as an organic whole, to cite a favourite metaphor of the 19th century. Of course, a more pragmatic tradition of analysis continued with the 19th-century pedagogical "Kompositionslehre". That is, musical pieces might be analysed for the purpose of learning and testing norms of chordal succession or form. But by the 20th century, with the loss of a common grammar of tonality and received forms of organizational structure, music analysis was increasingly becoming piece-orientated.  Heinrich Schenker occupies a particularly important place in 20th-century music analysis, not simply because his ideas have enjoyed such unparalleled influence - especially in Anglo-American academic circles - but because his work so clearly reflects the dialectic relation of music analysis and theoretical systematization. Originating through an intensive study of a select canon of tonal masterworks (especially Beethoven), Schenker's mature theory of the "Ursatz" and its "prolongation" through structural levels emerged only after many years of struggle and thought. Although presented as an "a priori" systems of tonal logic, Schenker's theory also receives empirical validation - and indeed, can only be known - through practice, albeit a practice that is highly selective and arguably self-confirming.  Schenker's theory presents itself as both a universal theory of tonality and a sophisticated tool of analysis by which an individual piece of tonal music may be opened up for inspection and its individuating features of harmony, form and thematic content delineated with unprecedented precision (see Schenker, heinrich).  At the close of the 20th century, music theory and analysis seemed finally to have matured as intellectual disciplines. Particularly in North America, although increasingly elsewhere, many academic programmes of music theory were established in universities and music conservatories alongside more traditional programmes of historical musicology. At the same time, numerous academic journals and professional societies devoted to music theory and analysis were founded, including the "Journal of Music Theory" (1957), "Musical Analysis" (1981) and "Musiktheorie" (1986), and the publications of the Society for Music Theory (from 1977).  It is ironic that just as music theory seems to have become institutionally accepted, strong criticisms have been voiced within those institutions concerning its conservative domain and scientistic aspirations (Kerman, 1985). Most compellingly, perhaps, many music theorists and analysts have been criticized for their penchant for considering musical pieces and styles largely from a formalistic, autonomous point of view rather than within broader historical and cultural contexts. At the same time, theorists have been faulted for too often disregarding questions of affect, expression or meaning in musical pieces at the expense of structural description.  It is true that in the course of the 20th century, much scholarship in music theory could be characterized as highly formalistic. Logical positivism, in particular, was an obvious influence on the work of many theorists such as Babbitt, who famously demanded that all analytic statements about music should adhere to strictly scientific criteria of formulation and verification (Babbitt, 1961, p.3). Other potent influences on music analysis (particularly in the 1960s) were developments in literary theory and specifically the movements of "New Criticism" and structuralism, by which texts were analysed as discrete and autonomous objects standing apart from questions of historical origin or authorial intention. Certainly, a number of music theorists in their analytic work have tested a formidable array of tools and models borrowed from neighbouring disciplines that on the surface suggest positivist and structuralist pedigree, including mathematical group theory (David Lewin), cognitive psychology (Leonard Meyer, Eugene Narmour), information theory (Kraehenbuhl and Coons), generative linguistics (Lehrdahl and Jackendoff), and semiotics (Jean-Jacques Nattiez, Kofi Agawu and Robert Hatten). Probably little of this research would stand the test of Babbitt's strict rules for theoretical formulation and verification. As in many other scholarly disciplines, the explicitly positivistic and structuralist aspirations of music theory in the 1960s and 70s have considerably receded.  If in reality music theory and analysis were ever as uniformally conservative and narrow in scope as their critics have implied, it was certainly not true at the close of the 20th century. The repertories of music considered by analysts expanded dramatically to include virtually all historical periods, as well as much non-Western music and popular or vernacular musics. At the same time, many theorists showed increased sensitivity to problems of historical and social context, affective content and reception in their analyses. In particular, interpretative and critical modes of analysis (whose origins may be traced back to late 19th-century traditions of "hermeneutic" analysis) are strongly evident in much recent musicological scholarship (Scott Burnham, Rose Subotnik, Brian Hyer), as are radically subjective "phenomenological" modes of analysis (Thomas Clifton, Benjamin Boretz, Marion Guck) and post-Freudian theories of compositional influence and repression (Joseph Straus, Kevin Korsyn). Even issues regarding gender and sexuality so dominant in much "postmodern" cultural criticism have been provocatively addressed by some recent musicologists (Susan McClary, Lawrence Kramer; see §II, below). Yet if music theory and analysis are to continue to retain identities as authentic intellectual traditions, it is perhaps desirable to maintain some degree of epistemological formalism and empirical rigour. Far from suggesting a weakness in the programme of music theory, a certain autonomy - and tension - in relation to historical musicology and cultural criticism may indeed be a healthy sign of its vitality and integrity.  Thomas Christensen   Copyright (C) Oxford University Press 2007-2013.
			